Smart contract overview update (#808)
ethereum-optimism/docs: pages/stack/smart-contracts.mdx

---
title: Smart Contract Overview
lang: en-US
description: Learn about the smart contracts that make up the OP Stack.
---

import { Callout } from 'nextra/components'

# Smart Contract Overview

This guide provides an overview of the functionality of the smart contract components. You can also find [contract addresses](/chain/addresses) on OP Mainnet.

## Layer 1 Contracts

The layer 1 contracts of the OP Stack are deployed on Ethereum. Their primary
purpose is to facilitate the cross domain message passing and maintain the
valid state root of the layer 2.

### Official Releases

The full smart contract release process is documented in the [monorepo](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism?tab=readme-ov-file#development-and-release-process).
All production releases are always tags, versioned as `<component-name>/v<semver>`

> and contract releases you'll see them tagged as `op-contract/vX.X.X`.

Reviewer: Non-blocking light edits, bolding for visibility but that formatting shouldn't be carried over

> All production releases are always tagged, versioned as `<component-name>/v<semver>`
> and contract releases you'll see tagged as `op-contract/vX.X.X`.

<Callout type="warning">
  For contract releases, refer to the GitHub release notes for a given release,
  which will list the specific contracts being released—**not all contracts are
  considered production ready within a release**, and many are under active
  development. These release pages are linked below.

  Tags of the form `v<semver>`, such as `v1.1.4`, indicate releases of all Go code
  only, and **DO NOT** include smart contracts.
</Callout>

> #### op-contracts/v1.5.0 - Safe Extensions

Reviewer: @sbvegan thoughts on adding a callout here for who should / should not use these, even though they're gov approved? The callout would point to op-contracts/v1.3.0 with something like, "Note: While these have been gov-approved, the recommended release for new production chains is..."

  *   DisputeGameFactory: [1.0.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.4.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/dispute/DisputeGameFactory.sol#L25)
  *   AnchorStateRegistry: [1.0.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.4.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/dispute/AnchorStateRegistry.sol#L28)
  *   DelayedWETH: [1.0.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.4.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/dispute/weth/DelayedWETH.sol#L25)
  *   MIPS: [1.0.1](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.4.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/cannon/MIPS.sol#L47)
  *   PreimageOracle: [1.0.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.4.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/cannon/PreimageOracle.sol#L33)
  *   SuperchainConfig: [1.1.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.2.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L1/SuperchainConfig.sol#L38)
  *   ProtocolVersions: [1.0.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.2.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L1/ProtocolVersions.sol#L39)

</details>

#### op-contracts/v1.4.0 - Fault Proofs

> 

Reviewer: Likewise consider a callout here

  *   L1CrossDomainMessenger: [2.3.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.3.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L1/L1CrossDomainMessenger.sol#L24)
  *   L1ERC721Bridge: [2.1.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.3.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L1/L1ERC721Bridge.sol#L27)
  *   L1StandardBridge: [2.1.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.3.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L1/L1StandardBridge.sol#L73)
  *   OptimismMintableERC20Factory: [1.9.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.3.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/universal/OptimismMintableERC20Factory.sol#L46)
  *   SuperchainConfig: [1.1.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.2.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L1/SuperchainConfig.sol#L38)
  *   ProtocolVersions: [1.0.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.2.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L1/ProtocolVersions.sol#L39)
</details>

#### op-contracts/v1.3.0 - Multi-Chain Prep (MCP)

> 

Reviewer: Callout for this is the recommended contract set for new chains

  *   L1ERC721Bridge: [1.1.1](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.0.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/contracts/L1/L1ERC721Bridge.sol#L23)
  *   L1StandardBridge: [1.1.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.0.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/contracts/L1/L1StandardBridge.sol#L94)
  *   L2OutputOracle: [1.3.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.0.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/contracts/L1/L2OutputOracle.sol#L81)
  *   OptimismMintableERC20Factory: [1.1.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.0.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/contracts/universal/OptimismMintableERC20Factory.sol#L47)
  *   OptimismPortal: [1.6.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.0.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/contracts/L1/OptimismPortal.sol#L143)
  *   SystemConfig: [1.3.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.0.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/contracts/L1/SystemConfig.sol#L83)
</details>

> ### L1 Contract Details

Author: Good idea, I'll remove them and folks can use the links in the changelog. I'll also track down those missing contracts

#### AddressManager [Latest (this has no version)](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.2.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/legacy/AddressManager.sol)

> AddressManager is a legacy contract that was used in the old version of the 
> Optimism system to manage a registry of string names to addresses. We now use a
> more standard proxy system instead, but this contract is still necessary for 
> backwards compatibility with several older contracts.

Reviewer 2: All existing and new deployments will still use this—the L1CrossDomainMessenger is always behind a ResolvedDelegateProxy, and ResolvedDelegateProxy is the proxy type we have that relies on an AddressManager. Feel free to tweak phrasing how you see fit
```suggestion
AddressManager is a legacy contract that was used in the old version of the 
Optimism system to manage a registry of string names to addresses. We now use a
more standard proxy system for most contracts, but this contract is still used for
the L1CrossDomainMessenger, via ResolvedDelegateProxy
```

#### SuperchainConfig: [1.1.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.2.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L1/SuperchainConfig.sol#L38)

The SuperchainConfig contract is used to manage configuration of global 

> superchain values.

Reviewer 2: The key thing it currently handles is pausing/unpausing all withdrawals (ETH/ERC20/ERC721) for the superchain, which I think is worth calling out here.

#### L1CrossDomainMessenger: [2.3.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.3.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L1/L1CrossDomainMessenger.sol#L24)

The L1CrossDomainMessenger is a message passing interface between L1 and L2
responsible for sending and receiving data on the L1 side. Users are encouraged
to use this interface instead of interacting with lower-level contracts directly.

#### L1ERC721Bridge: [2.1.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.3.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L1/L1ERC721Bridge.sol#L27)

The `L1ERC721bridge` is a contract which works together with the L2 ERC721 bridge

> to make it possible to transfer ERC721 tokens from Ethereum to Optimism. This

Reviewer 2: I think our docs are OP Mainnet specific, ignore if not
```suggestion
to make it possible to transfer ERC721 tokens from Ethereum to OP Mainnet. This
```

contract acts as an escrow for ERC721 tokens deposited into L2.

#### L1StandardBridge: [2.1.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.3.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L1/L1StandardBridge.sol#L73)

<Callout type="warning">
  This contract is not intended to support all variations of ERC20 tokens. Examples
  of some token types that may not be properly supported by this contract include, but are
  not limited to: tokens with transfer fees, rebasing tokens, and tokens with blocklists.
</Callout>

The `L1StandardBridge` is responsible for transferring ETH and ERC20 tokens between L1 and
L2. In the case that an ERC20 token is native to L1, it will be escrowed within this
contract. If the ERC20 token is native to L2, it will be burnt. Before Bedrock, ETH was
stored within this contract. After Bedrock, ETH is instead stored inside the

> OptimismPortal contract.

Reviewer 2: There is not ETH in this contract on L1, so maybe we delete the pre-Bedrock note for simplicity?

#### OptimismPortal: [3.10.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/547ea72d9849e13ce169fd31df0f9197651b3f86/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L1/OptimismPortal2.sol#L144)

The `OptimismPortal` is a low-level contract responsible for passing messages between L1
and L2. Messages sent directly to the `OptimismPortal` have no form of replayability.
Users are encouraged to use the `L1CrossDomainMessenger` for a higher-level interface.

#### ProtocolVersions: [1.0.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.2.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L1/ProtocolVersions.sol#L39)

> The `ProtocolVersions` contract is used to manage Superchain protocol version information.

Reviewer 2: If you want to expand, there's more info here: https://specs.optimism.io/protocol/superchain-upgrades.html

The gist is that it exposes a `recommended` and `required` node version (the go code releases, NOT contract releases) for node operators. The recommended/required versions are changed with each hard fork. Nodes can optionally halt if using the wrong version

#### SuperchainConfig: [1.1.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.2.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L1/SuperchainConfig.sol#L38)

> The `SuperchainConfig` contract is used to manage configuration of global Superchain values.

Reviewer 2: This was documented above also, it's duplicated here

#### SystemConfig: [2.0.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.4.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L1/SystemConfig.sol#L111)

The `SystemConfig` contract is used to manage configuration of an OP Stack network.
All configuration is stored on L1 and picked up by L2 as part of the derivation of

> the L2 chain.

Reviewer 2: It's not *all* configuration, so we may want to tweak the phrasing a bit. Also a nice aspect of the SystemConfig (starting from MCP) is that it has references to all other contract addresses for the chain, so just by having the system config address for a chain you can discover the rest of its contracts

> #### DEPRECATED - L2OutputOracle: [1.8.0](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/op-contracts/v1.3.0/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L1/L2OutputOracle.sol#L59)

Reviewer 2: As mentioned above, we also need to add docs for the new FP contracts in this section

contract. If the ERC20 token is native to L2, it will be burnt. 

#### OptimismPortal

The `OptimismPortal` is a low-level contract responsible for passing messages between L1
and L2. Messages sent directly to the `OptimismPortal` have no form of replayability.
Users are encouraged to use the `L1CrossDomainMessenger` for a higher-level interface.

#### ProtocolVersions

The `ProtocolVersions` contract is used to manage Superchain protocol version 
information. It exposes a recommended and required version for node operators.
The recommended/required versions are changed with each hard fork. Nodes can 
optionally halt if using the wrong version.

#### SystemConfig

The `SystemConfig` contract is helps manage configuration of an OP Stack 
network. Much of the network's configuration is stored on L1 and picked up by 
L2 as part of the derivation of the L2 chain. The contract also contains 
references to all other contract addresses for the chain.

#### DisputeGameFactory

The `DisputeGameFactory` contract generates `FaultDisputeGame` contract 
instances.

#### FaultDisputeGame 

The `FaultDisputeGame` contract instances that each act as a host to a proposal 

> about the state of the OP Stack chain at a given block number.

Reviewer 2: Typo in this sentence? "The `FaultDisputeGame` contract instances that each act" is confusing me

Author: Yeah this is a frankenstein's monster from pulling this out of the dipsutegamefactory

*   **Address:** `0x4200000000000000000000000000000000000011`
*   **Introduced:** Legacy
*   **Deprecated:** no
*   **Proxied:** yes

### OptimismMintableERC20Factory

The `OptimismMintableERC20Factory` is responsible for creating ERC20 contracts
on L2 that can be used for depositing native L1 tokens into. These ERC20
contracts can be created permissionlessly and implement the interface required
by the StandardBridge to just work with deposits and withdrawals.

Each ERC20 contract that is created by the `OptimismMintableERC20Factory`
allows for the L2StandardBridge to mint and burn tokens, depending on if the
user is depositing from L1 to L2 or withdrawing from L2 to L1.

*   **Address:** `0x4200000000000000000000000000000000000012`
*   **Introduced:** Legacy
*   **Deprecated:** no
*   **Proxied:** yes

### GasPriceOracle

In the legacy system, the `GasPriceOracle` was a permissioned contract that was
pushed the L1 base fee and the L2 gas price by an offchain actor. The offchain
actor observes the L1 blockheaders to get the L1 base fee as well as the gas
usage on L2 to compute what the L2 gas price should be based on a congestion
control algorithm.

> After Bedrock, the `GasPriceOracle` is no longer a permissioned contract and

Reviewer 2: Delete legacy pre-Bedrock info and just explain what it currently is?

ignored.

*   **Address:** `0x420000000000000000000000000000000000000F`
*   **Introduced:** Legacy
*   **Deprecated:** no
*   **Proxied:** yes

### GovernanceToken

The OP token used in governance and supporting voting and delegation.
Implements EIP 2612 allowing signed approvals. Contract is "owned" by a
`MintManager` instance with permission to the `mint` function only, for the
purposes of enforcing the token inflation schedule.

*   **Address:** `0x4200000000000000000000000000000000000042`
*   **Introduced:** Legacy
*   **Deprecated:** no
*   **Proxied:** no

### L1Block

The `L1Block` predeploy gives users access to information about the last known
L1 block. Values within this contract are updated once per epoch (every L1
block) and can only be set by the "depositor" account, a special system
address. Depositor account transactions are created by the protocol whenever we
move to a new epoch.

*   **Address:** `0x4200000000000000000000000000000000000015`
*   **Introduced:** Bedrock
*   **Deprecated:** no
*   **Proxied:** yes

### L2ToL1MessagePasser

<Callout>
  There is a legacy contract under this same name.

> </Callout>

Reviewer 2: What does this mean? I'm not familiar with this (doesn't mean it's not true, just unclear what this means exactly and if this matters to readers)

Author: idk where this came from tbh, I'm going to remove it

The `L2ToL1MessagePasser` is a dedicated contract where messages that are being
sent from L2 to L1 can be stored. The storage root of this contract is pulled
up to the top level of the L2 output to reduce the cost of proving the
existence of sent messages.

*   **Address:** `0x4200000000000000000000000000000000000016`
*   **Introduced:** Bedrock
*   **Deprecated:** no
*   **Proxied:** yes

### L2ERC721Bridge

<Callout type="warning">
  Do not bridge an ERC721 that was originally deployed on Optimism. This
  bridge ONLY supports ERC721s originally deployed on Ethereum. Users will need to
  wait for the one-week challenge period to elapse before their Optimism-native NFT
  can be refunded on L2.
</Callout>

> The `L2ERC721Bridge` is a contract which works together with the L1 ERC721 bridge to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `L2ERC721Bridge` is a contract which works together with the `L1ERC721Bridge` to
```
